# Apollo

**Apollo** is an S-SMP/S-DSP emulator core written in Zig for Windows and Linux. Its primary purpose is to be used for playing SPC files, but can also be used for general-purpose SNES APU emulation.

In its current state, Apollo comes included with a debugging SPC player using a command-line interface, but the long-term goal is for this to function more as a library rather than a standalone application.

## Releases

The latest stable version is available from the [releases on GitHub](https://github.com/jimmy-dsi/apollo-spc/releases).

## Prerequesites Before Running

### Windows

It is **highly** recommended that you install either the [Windows Terminal](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/terminal/install) or [msys2](https://www.msys2.org/) if you haven't already. The **cmd** or **Windows Powershell** apps will ***not*** display this app correctly. (Essentially, you need a terminal emulator which supports coloring and cursor re-positioning via ANSI codes)

You will also need to download a copy of [ffplay](https://github.com/ffbinaries/ffbinaries-prebuilt/releases/download/v4.4.1/ffplay-4.4.1-win-64.zip) ([main download page](https://ffbinaries.com/downloads)) and add it to your system PATH variable. You can do this via a sequence of Powershell commands:

```powershell
$ffplayPath = "C:\path\to\your\ffplay\folder"
$env:Path = $ffplayPath + ";" + $env:Path
$newPath = $ffplayPath + ";" + [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("PATH", "User")
[System.Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable("PATH", $newPath, "User")
```

(If you prefer not to use Powershell for this, you can also open "Edit the system environment variables" from the Windows taskbar search menu and modify the value for `Path` under user variables.)

### Linux

For Linux, you will need to make sure you have *at least one* of the following binaries installed:
- **paplay**
- **aplay**
- **ffplay**

On most Linux distributions, it is highly likely that you already have **paplay** or **aplay** pre-installed on your system, but if that is not the case, you can install them via your package manager:

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install pulseaudio-utils # For paplay
sudo apt install alsa-utils       # For aplay
```

## Running the Application

Assuming you have already met the prerequesites for your system above, running the player is as simple as invoking the **play** app with the path of your SPC file as the argument.

### Usage (Windows)

```powershell
.\play.exe "<path-to-your-spc-file.spc>"
```

### Usage (Linux)

```bash
./play "<path-to-your-spc-file.spc>"
```

You may also notice that the provided release folder contains a total of two programs: **play** and **apollo-spc-program**. It's worth noting that **apollo-spc-program** is the actual SPC player—**play** is just the launcher for it.

If you are interested in knowing how to run **apollo-spc-program** directly without requiring the **play** launcher, check out the [Advanced Usage](#advanced-usage) section.

## Compiling

See [COMPILING-Windows.md](COMPILING-Windows.md) or [COMPILING-Linux.md](COMPILING-Linux.md)

## Advanced Usage

The CLI SPC player, **apollo-spc-program**, does not actually output any audio itself. This is an intentional design decision that was made in order to keep the Zig CLI app itself as simple and as non-reliant on external dependencies as possible (since this will eventually be converted into a standalone library).

Because of this, the app works by *outputting the generated audio data to stdout directly*.

This means that if you were to run the program directly...
```bash
./apollo-spc-program "<path-to-your-spc-file.spc>"
```
...you wouldn't hear any audio. Instead, you would see strings upon strings of garbage being printed to your terminal faster than you could even read it (if it were even *readable* to begin with...)

The **play** launcher app included in this repo handles this by piping the audio output stream generated by the SPC player into another program. This other program interprets the input given to it as audio data and sends it through your speakers in realtime.

The **play** app will check your environment to determine the appropriate program to pipe the output data to. If **paplay** is present, it sends it through **paplay**. If not, it then checks the same for **aplay**, and finally, **ffplay**.

If you would rather handle this yourself rather than use the **play** launcher, you can run the equivalent commands yourself in your terminal.

### Manual Run Commands

For **paplay**:
```bash
./apollo-spc-program "<path-to-your-spc-file.spc>" | \
    paplay --raw --format=s16le --rate=32000 --channels=2
```

For **aplay**:
```bash
./apollo-spc-program "<path-to-your-spc-file.spc>" | \
    aplay -t raw -f s16_le -r 32000 -c 2 -q
```

For **ffplay**:
```bash
./apollo-spc-program "<path-to-your-spc-file.spc>" | \
    ffplay -f s16le -ar 32000 -ac 2 -i pipe:0 -loglevel quiet \
    -fflags nobuffer -flags low_delay -analyzeduration 0 \
    -probesize 32 -nodisp -framedrop -autoexit
```

**Windows (Powershell 6+)**:
```powershell
.\apollo-spc-program.exe "<path-to-your-spc-file.spc>" | `
    ffplay -f s16le -ar 32000 -ac 2 -i pipe:0 -loglevel quiet `
    -fflags nobuffer -flags low_delay -analyzeduration 0 `
    -probesize 32 -nodisp -framedrop -autoexit
```

**Windows (Older Powershell versions / cmd)**:
```powershell
cmd.exe /c ".\apollo-spc-program.exe ""<path-to-your-spc-file.spc>"" | ffplay -f s16le -ar 32000 -ac 2 -i pipe:0 -loglevel quiet -fflags nobuffer -flags low_delay -analyzeduration 0 -probesize 32 -nodisp -framedrop -autoexit"
```
Note: This must be triggered using `cmd.exe /c` on older Powershell profile versions, as those do not handle piping correctly.

### Exporting Raw PCM

Because the player sends the generated audio data to standard output directly, you can use this to generate raw PCM file by using output redirection:

```bash
./apollo-spc-program "<path-to-your-spc-file.spc>" > your-pcm-file.raw
```

Please use caution while using output redirection, however. The SPC player does not have a "stopping point"—it will just keep generating audio endlessly.

Because of this, it is recommended that you stop the process via CTRL+C after a few seconds. Do not let it run endlessly or else it will continuously use up disk space.

This raw file can be imported into tools such as Audacity or ffmpeg and converted to .wav, or any other supported audio format—Just be sure to set the imported raw format to 16-bit stereo at 32kHz (little endian).

## Licensing

**Apollo** is licensed under the **Mozilla Public License**, version 2.0.

This license applies to all source files included in this repo, with the exception of the ones under the [Jimbl](src/cli/play/Jimbl) directory, which are licensed under MIT.